Document init tasks (#35918)
quarkusio/quarkus: docs/src/main/asciidoc/init-tasks.adoc

Further customization to the container can be done using using the configuration options for init containers (see `quarkus.kubernetes.init-containers` or `quarkus.openshift.init-containers`).

Examples:

To set the imagePullPolicy to `IfNotPresent` on the init container that waits for the `flyway` job:

[source,properties]
----
quarkus.kubernetes.init-containers.wait-for-flyway.image-pull-policy=IfNotPresent
----

To set custom command (say `custom-wait-for`) on the init container that waits for the `flyway` job:

[source,properties]
----
quarkus.kubernetes.init-containers.wait-for-flyway.command=custom-wait-for
----

== Orchestration of the initialization tasks

The deployment resource should not start until the job has been completed. The typical pattern that is used among Kubernetes users is the
use of init containers to achieve this. An init container that `wait for` the job to complete is enough to enforce that requirement.

=== Using a custom wait-for container image

To change the `wait-for` image which by default is `groundnuty/k8s-wait-for:no-root-v1.7` you can use:

[source,properties]
----

> quarkus.kubernetes.init-task-defaults.wait-for-image=my/wait-for-image:1.0

Reviewer: not sure if this is just how it was done or new names but feels we are being somewhat inconsistent in naming here:

`quarkus.kubernetes.init-task-defaults.wait-for-image` vs `quarkus.kubernetes.init-containers.wait-for-flyway`

should it be `init-task-defaults` and `-init-task.wait-for-flyway` or `init-containers-defaults` and `init-containers.wait-for-flyway` ? 

and should `wait-for-flyway` be `wait-for-flyway-image` ?

Reviewer 2: I agree with @maxandersen, it looks more consistent.

Author: > and should `wait-for-flyway` be `wait-for-flyway-image` ?

In `quarkus.kubernetes.init-container.wait-for-flyway.image` the `wait-for-flyway` part is the container name. This is part of the container customization options that we have since forever.

The `quarkus.kubernetes.init-task-defaults` is a new object I added to hold a couple of flags and a default image. 

I could possibly change the way we pass the image to be more aligned with how we configure containers and make it something like `quarkus.kubernetes.init-task-defaults.wait-for-container.image`. Would that work better @maxandersen @cescoffier ?

Reviewer 2: +1

For example Flyway or Liquibase initialization fall into that category. But what happens when the scaling
needs of an application requires more instances of the application to run? Or what happens when the application
restarts ?

A common environment where both of these cases are pretty common is Kubernetes. To address these challenges,
Quarkus allows externalization of such tasks as Kubernetes Jobs and uses init containers to ensure that an 
application instance only starts once the initialization jobs have finished. With this approach even if an 
application has multiple replicas, the initialization logic will only run once.

This approach is reflected in the manifests generated by xref:kubernetes.adoc[Kubernetes extension].

== Disabling the feature

The feature can be explictily disabled per task (enabled by default).
The default behavior can change setting the following property to `false`:

[source,properties]
----
quarkus.openshift.init-task-defaults.enabled=false
----

In the case where we need to disable a particular task, we can use the following property:

[source,properties]
----
quarkus.openshift.init-tasks."<task name>".enabled=false
----

> The task name is the name of the Kubernetes Job resource that follows the convention `${quarkus.appliction.name}-${extension}-init`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The task name is the name of the Kubernetes Job resource that follows the convention `${quarkus.application.name}-${extension}-init`.
```

> If the convention is hard to remember you can always peek at the generated manifests.

Author: This uses the generated job name for correlation. The job names needs to be unique and thus needs both the app name and the extension. 

I agree with your that it's too complicated and we need to change that. I'll change the implementation so that it just uses the extension name and not the full job name.

> == Controlling the generated Job

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
== Controlling the generated job
```

> == Controlling the generated Job

Author: With the current implementation the user needs to know that in order to configure the job if needed.

It doesn't really matter, as I am currently in the process of simplifying configuration, so this part will be dropped.

> The Job container is pretty similar to the application container and the only thing that changes is the configured environment variables.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The job container is pretty similar to the application container, and the only thing that changes is the configured environment variables.
```

> More specifically, the following environment variable is added, to tell the Job to exit right after initialization.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
More specifically, the following environment variable is added to tell the job to exit right after initialization.
```

[source,properties]
----
QUARKUS_INIT_AND_EXIT=true
----

> The image, image pull policy, service account, volumes, mounts and additional environment variables are inherited from the deployment resource.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The image, image pull policy, service account, volumes, mounts, and additional environment variables are inherited from the deployment resource.
```

Yes, but not applied to the init-container container.

> Any customization that happens to the original deployment resource (via configuration or extension) will be reflected in the Job too.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Any customization to the original deployment resource (via configuration or extension) will also be reflected in the job.
```

== Coordination between Job and deployment

> The deploymnet resource should not start until the Job has succesfully completed. The common pattern that is used among Kubernetes users is the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The deployment resource should not start until the job has been completed. The typical pattern that is used among Kubernetes users is the
```
